---
title: "Supplemental Quotes to the FCC Letter"
date: 2015-10-14T20:44:58
type: news
author: Rich Brown
aliases:
    - /news/56
---
“Wi-Fi devices aren’t just radios: they are network devices. The
software that governs them impacts the security and reliability of the
whole network. If we leave firmware solely in the hands of
manufacturers, we close the door to the very independent research that
has been advancing the state of Internet technology and security all
along.” -- *Susan E. Sons, Director, Internet Civil Engineering
Institute*

"The security implications should be obvious to anyone who's been paying
attention to recent headlines. Less obvious is all the research and
other work that goes on behind the scenes, by the very people who made
the Internet what it is today. Losing the ability to control the
software that runs on these devices would bring this kind of research to
a halt, and tie the hands of many brilliant minds who have dedicated
their lives and careers to the continued improvement of the network we
all depend on. If we want to build the fast, secure, reliable Internet
of the future, this kind of research must be allowed to continue." --
*Jeff Loughlin, Independent Researcher and Open Source Developer*

"Leveraging off-the-shelf WiFi hardware plays an important role in
academic research in the field. Locked down devices would both
independent verification of vendor performance claims and research into
improving performance of current and future generation WiFi." -- *Toke
Høiland-Jørgensen, Bufferbloat researcher at Karlstad University,
Sweden*

“Dyn provides performance solutions for a significant proportion of the
world's most popular web properties, and invests significant resources
in maintaining the availability of our global DNS platform in the face
of near constant attack. Low-cost (near zero-margin) home and
small-business routers, easily compromised, are a significant
contributor to attack traffic that we mitigate every day. In the race to
the bottom, these devices are effectively unsupported by those who sell
them; the ability to harden such devices is essential to the future
success of the Internet as a reliable platform for communication and
commerce.” -- *Joe Abley, Director of Architecture, Dyn*

“Software upgradeability and inspection is vitally important, and should
not be impaired. It is unimaginable that the FCC would propose anything
to impede updates to network elements, and I hope that the words in the
petition are considered carefully and used as a template for sane (and
light) legislation.” -- *John Todd, Senior Technologist at Packet
Clearing House*

“As the editor of the IETF standards document RFC 7368 “IPv6 Home
Networking Architecture Principles”, which describes how future IPv6
home networks can be built, I fully support the Letter submitted to the
FCC,. The IETF works on the principle of rough consensus and running
code, and the ability to modify and update open source home router
images enables innovation and the future advancement of the Internet” --
*Dr Tim Chown, Lecturer, University of Southampton (UK)*

“While looking at regulation, it would be more useful to consider
ensuring vendors adopt IPv6 as they have ignored it for the last 10+
years requiring a complete device replacement. FOSS has enabled many of
their devices to be updated rather than dumped in landfill.” -- *Brandon
Butterworth, Chief Scientist, British Broadcasting Corporation*

“The Internet of Things shouldn't be the Internet of Vulnerable
Unpatchable Abandoned-by-Manufacturer Things.” -- *Will Edwards*

"Unlike global climate change, software is a human construct, conceived
by engineers. The use and management of it is therefore modifiable to be
optimized for future use by qualified people with predictable positive
results for security. As such, these issues deserve to have sufficient
technical resources and intelligent legal framework to make this
happen." -- *Randy Resnick, Creator, IP Communications & VoIP Community
and VoIP Users Conference*

“I was one of the designers of the Minstrel rate control algorithm that
is now used for many, many Wi-Fi devices. Minstrel approximately doubled
the range and gave a 10x improvement in throughput for Wi-Fi devices of
the time, at the same time as decreasing their time-average radiated
power. That research would have been prohibited or greatly impeded by
the proposed rulemaking. It was done outside of the FCC jurisdiction, in
New Zealand, but other countries tend to follow the FCC rule structure,
and technical measures to implement the proposed FCC rules would be a
serious impediment to doing that sort of work irrespective of the legal
aspects. Further, this rule would set a precedent that would inevitably
be applied in other areas of technology, and this would cause a great
deal of harm to research and innovation. Locked-down firmware on
Internet-connected devices stands to become a very serious problem for
society, and should not be encouraged in any way. I strongly agree with
the proposed alternate path for that reason.” -- *Andrew McGregor: Linux
WiFi developer (Minstrel rate control), IETF working group chair, AQM
developer and SDN researcher*

“"Software by its very nature has bugs and will be vulnerable to attack.
The only way we can be confident that such a critical piece of our
societal infrastructure is as safe as possible is if the source code is
made fully available for review and can be fixed by anyone with
authority when problems arise. This alternate proposal, which is
grounded in a deep understanding of how security issues really play out
in this context, should be seriously considered by the FCC." -- *Karen
M. Sandler, Executive Director, Software Freedom Conservancy*

"We are entering an era where an array of interconnected devices will
create 'lowest common denominator security' within the most private
reaches of our homes. True cybersecurity results from open code, peer
review, and user control over their own devices and data; our
recommended solutions are fundamentally important to the future growth
of the Internet of Things economy.” -- *Sascha Meinrath, Palmer Chair in
Telecommunications at Penn State University*

“With the Internet of Things upon us, regulators can play a vital role
in making our hardware secure. By requiring industry-leading engineering
practices like we’ve described in this comment, the FCC can ensure
Americans have more secure devices which respect the radio spectrum. At
the same time, these practices provide makers and inventors with the
flexibility necessary for world-leading innovation.” -- *Eric Schultz*
